Drama vs. Words: Does the story or the performance determine the rating
of an audiobook

![](media/image1.png){width="3.93125in" height="2.2235083114610674in"}

In 2016, the [Wall Street
Journal](https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-fastest-growing-format-in-publishing-audiobooks-1469139910)
wrote that audiobooks were the fastest growing format in publishing. As
an effort to understanding this segment of the publishing industry I
analyzed English-language audiobooks to determine if the overall rating
for an audiobook is determined more by the performance or by the story.
The data is from the Audible.com website.

Audible.com is a technology company that produces, sells, and markets
audiobooks. The audiobooks from Audible.com are purchased through its
online platform and can be streamed or downloaded through its
proprietary app. Audible was established in 1995 and has over 150
employees. Audible was purchased for \$300 million dollars by Amazon.com
in 2008. Audible has a library of over 200,000 English-Language
audiobooks. This relatively long history and deep catalogue makes
Audible a good source of data for audiobooks. The webpages for
audiobooks also have a uniform format easing the difficulty of scraping.

Using the Scrapy framework, I scraped data from the Audible website on
English-language audiobooks. This table was used to populate a table
that included data about the book along with the ratings and number of
ratings. The data collected from the page is shown below.

![](media/image2.png){width="3.8497309711286087in"
height="2.5788265529308836in"}

The scraper was setup to start on the first page listing links
audiobooks. Each audiobook link was followed and the data downloaded and
returned to the original page. The link to the next page was followed
using recursion until the final page is reached. Using this process, a
table of \~203,000 audiobooks was generated. Of these \~42,000
audiobooks were never reviewed. With several hundred more having only
Overall reviews. Only books with complete reviews are included in charts
with reviews, while the entire dataset is included for charts
characterizing the data.

The distribution of the overall rating, performance ratings, and story
ratings are shown below. The most common rating for an audiobook is 4
for all categories. The second most common is 5 for the performance
rating and between 4 and 5 for the overall. These indicate the ratings
are not equally distributed between the lower ratings are not given
often. Thus, most rated books should be skewed high. Since people do not
usually purchase books they do not expect to enjoy this is not
surprising.

![](media/image3.png){width="3.6947561242344706in"
height="2.6277777777777778in"}

The number of ratings per book shows a sharp peak at 1. Of the \~150,000
rated books on Audible, most have a single rating. The low number
ratings per book indicate why the distribution of ratings (above) has
strong peaks at the integer values. Note that the rating distribution
(below) removes all ratings over 1500 for clarity.

![](media/image4.png){width="3.7072364391951007in"
height="2.5788265529308836in"}

Book length is a possible important measure, longer books may be rated
lower due to length. I plotted the density of the overall rating vs. the
length in minutes (below) with the outliers removed (2 standard
deviations from the mean length). From the plot, it is easy to see that
longer books are not rated lower than shorter books. The trend is
reverse with longer books having a higher rating than shorter books.

![](media/image5.png){width="3.80625in" height="2.6399759405074366in"}

We can plot the overall rating against the performance rating and the
story rating using a density plot to examine the relationship between
these variables. As seen below, there is a very strong linear
relationship between these variables. This correlation indicates both
the story and they performance are correlated with the overall rating.
This can be confirmed by the correlation coefficients,
overall-performance 0.81, and overall-story 0.88. Once could tentatively
conclude that while both are important, the story is more correlated
with the overall score and is more important.

![](media/image6.png){width="3.0737784339457566in"
height="2.126029090113736in"}![](media/image7.png){width="3.097333770778653in"
height="2.145300743657043in"}

To future explore the validity of the result I checked the correlation
between the performance and the story ratings. This value also shows a
string linear relationship and has a high correlation coefficient of
0.78. This correlation indicates that one cannot make a definite
determination based on the correlation to either performance or story as
one variable could determine the other.

![](media/image8.png){width="3.18125in" height="2.2041021434820647in"}

To understand which is more important we need to consider cases where
one is held constant while the other can vary. One method is to find
books with multiple narrators. The stories in these books donâ€™t vary but
the narrators are different. I explored 158 books with multiple
narrators. These books have overall, story and performance rating that
are almost same for each book but vary with narrator. It only a few
cases did the ratings diverge. This we can conclude that the perception
of the story is determined by the performance and the performance rating
helps to determine both the overall and the story rating. Writes should
carefully consider who narrators their story to have a rating the story
deserves.
